# Simulate Survival Data with Confounders

A function to simulate time-to-event data with one or multiple
confounders. The user can specify both the relationship between the
covariates and the survival time and the relationship between the
covariates and the treatment assignment probability. Random censoring
based on a custom function may also be introduced. Can be used for
simulation studies or to showcase the usage of the adjusted survival
curve methodology presented in this package.

## Usage

``` r
sim_confounded_surv(n=500, lcovars=NULL, outcome_betas=NULL,
                    group_beta=-1, surv_dist="weibull",
                    gamma=1.8, lambda=2, treatment_betas=NULL,
                    intercept=-0.5, gtol=0.001,
                    cens_fun=function(n){stats::rweibull(n, 1, 2)},
                    cens_args=list(), max_t=Inf)
```

## Arguments

- n:

  An integer specifying the sample size of the simulated data set.

- lcovars:

  A named list to specify covariates. Each list element should be a
  vector containing information on the desired covariate distribution.
  See details.

- outcome_betas:

  A named numeric vector of beta coefficients for the time-to-event
  outcome.

- group_beta:

  A number specifying the beta coefficient of the grouping variable on
  the survival time.

- surv_dist:

  A character string denoting the distribution used in the simulation of
  the survival time. See details.

- gamma:

  A numeric parameter for the simulation of the survival time. See
  details.

- lambda:

  A numeric parameter for the simulation of the survival time. See
  details.

- treatment_betas:

  A named numeric vector of beta coefficients for the treatment
  assignment model.

- intercept:

  The intercept of the treatment assignment model.

- gtol:

  Tolerance at which estimated treatment assignment probabilities are
  truncated.

- cens_fun:

  A function to generate censoring times or `NULL`. If `NULL`, no
  censoring is introduced.

- cens_args:

  Arguments passed to `cens_fun`. Ignored if `cens_fun=NULL`.

- max_t:

  A number denoting the maximum follow-up time. Every event time bigger
  than this threshold are censored.

## Details

The simulation of the confounded survival data has four main steps: (1)
Generation of covariates, (2) Assigning the treatment variable, (3)
Generating survival times and (4) introducing censoring.

First, covariates are generated by taking independent `n` random samples
from the distributions defined in `lcovars`.

In the second step the generated covariates are used to estimate the
probability of receiving treatment (the propensity score) for each
simulated person in the dataset. This is done using a logistic
regression model, using the values in `treatment_betas` as coefficients
and `interecept` as the intercept. By changing the intercept, the user
can vary the proportion of cases that end up in each treatment group on
average. The estimated probabilities are then used to generate the
treatment variable ("group"), making the treatment assignment dependent
on the covariates.

Next, survival times are generated based on the method described in
Bender et al. (2005) using the causal coefficients defined in
`outcome_betas` and `group_beta`. Both the independently generated
covariates and the covariate-dependent treatment variable are used in
this step. This introduces confounding.

Independent right-censoring is introduced by taking `n` independent
random draws from some distribution defined by `cens_fun` and censoring
every individual whose censoring time is smaller than its simulated
survival time. The whole process is based on work from Chatton et al.
(2020).

Currently only supports binary treatments and does not allow dependent
censoring.

## Value

Returns a `data.frame` object containing the simulated covariates, the
event indicator ("event"), the survival/censoring time ("time") and the
group variable ("group").

## References

Ralf Bender, Thomas Augustin, and Maria Blettner (2005). "Generating
Survival Times to Simulate Cox Proportional Hazards Models". In:
Statistics in Medicine 24.11, pp. 1713-1723

Arthur Chatton, Florent Le Borgne, Clémence Leyrat, and Yohann Foucher
(2020). G-Computation and Inverse Probability Weighting for
Time-To-Event Outcomes: A Comparative Study. arXiv:2006.16859v1

## Author

Robin Denz

## Examples

``` r
library(adjustedCurves)

set.seed(42)

# simulate data with default values
sim_dat <- sim_confounded_surv(n=10)

# simulate data with some new values
lcovars <- list(x1=c("rnorm", 1, 2),
                x2=c("rnorm", 3, 4),
                x3=c("runif", 1, 2))
treatment_betas <- c(x1=0.2, x2=0.6, x3=-0.9)
outcome_betas <- c(x1=1.1, x2=0, x3=-0.3)

sim_dat <- sim_confounded_surv(n=10, lcovars=lcovars,
                               treatment_betas=treatment_betas,
                               outcome_betas=outcome_betas)
```
